# Differential meta-analysis of RNA-seq data from multiple studies

Rau, A., Marot, G. & Jaffrézic, F. Differential meta-analysis of RNA-seq data from multiple studies. BMC Bioinformatics 15, 91 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2105-15-91

- The authors demonstrate how p-value combination techniques previously used for microarray meta-analyses can be used for the differential analysis of RNA-seq data from multiple related studies. These techniques are compared to a negative binomial generalized linear model (GLM) including a fixed study effect on simulated data and real data on human melanoma cell lines. The GLM with fixed study effect performed well for low inter-study variation and small numbers of studies, but was outperformed by the meta-analysis methods for moderate to large inter-study variability and larger numbers of studies. 

- The p-value combination techniques illustrated are a valuable tool to perform differential meta-analyses of RNA-seq data by appropriately accounting for biological and technical variability within studies as well as additional study-specific effects. An R package metaRNASeq is available on the CRAN (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/metaRNASeq). 

- methods must be able to appropriately account for the biological and technical variability among samples within a given study as well as for the additional variability due to study-specific effects. Such inter-study variability may arise due to technical dif- ferences among studies (e.g., sample preparation, library protocols, batch effects) as well as additional biological variability. 

- Many publication on using MA approach for microarray data, however meta-analysis techniques previously used for microarray data are not directly applicable for RNA-seq data 

- differential analyses of microarray data can use standard or moderated t- test, as such data are continuous and may be roughly approximated by a Gaussian distribution after log-transformation BUT differential analysis of RNA- seq data has primarily focused on the use of **overdispersed Poisson or negative binomial models due to highly heterogeneous and discrete nature**  
### Problem: How to calculate effect size with negative binomial models??


- The authors investigate several methods for the integrated analysis of RNA-seq data arising from multiple related studies: two p-value combination methods and a model fitted over the full data with a fixed study effect. They demonstrate how the inverse normal and Fisher p-value combination methods can be adapted to the differential meta-analysis of RNA-seq data. They compare these two methods to the results of independent per-study analyses and a negative binomial generalized linear model (GLM) with a fixed study effect as implemented in the DESeq Bioconductor package. All methods are compared on real data from two related studies on human melanoma cell lines, as well as in an extensive set of simulations varying the interstudy variability, number of studies, and biological replicates per study. 
- Applicable to: RNA-seq data aris- ing from two or more studies in which all experimental conditions under consideration are included in every study (with potentially different numbers of biological replicates 

- inverse normal and Fisher p-value combination methods can be adapted to the differential meta-analysis of RNA-seq data. 
- requires two additional considerations to be taken into account when dealing with RNA-seq data. 

1. "underlying assumption for the statistics defined in Equations (1) and (2) is that p-values for all genes arising from the per-study differential analyses are uniformly distributed under the null hypothesis. This assumption is, however, not always satisfied for RNA-seq data; in particular, a peak is often observed for p-values close to 1 due to the discretization of p-values for very low counts. To circumvent this first difficulty, as is commonly done for differential analyses in practice, we propose to filter the weakly expressed genes in each study, using the HTSFilter Bioconductor package [20] as described in the Additional file 1. We note that in so doing, it is possible for a gene to be filtered from one study and not from another. As will be seen in the following, this approach appears to effectively filter those genes contributing to a peak of large p-values, resulting in p-values that are roughly uniformly distributed under the null hypothesis." 

2. "for the two p-value combination methods described above, unlike microarray data, under- and over- expressed genes are analyzed together for RNA-seq data. As such, some care must be taken to identify genes exhibiting conflicting expression patterns (i.e., under- expression when comparing one condition to another in one study, and over-expression for the same comparison in another study). In the case of microarray data, Marot et al. [1] suggested the use of one-tailed p-values for each study to avoid directional conflicts; as the inverse normal combination method was used in their work, the combined statistic thus follows a normal distribution, which is symmetric. Because under- and over-expressed genes may be found in the left and right tail, respectively, of the corresponding normal distribution, it is thus possible to use a two-tailed test to simultaneously study over and under- expressed genes. Note that Pearson [21] and Owen [22] proposed another alternative to handle conflicting differential expression if the Fisher combination method is used instead. However, in the case of RNA-seq data, the use of the conditioned test described above does not enable the separation of over- and under-expressed genes in distribution tails; this implies that it is not possible to use the approaches proposed by Marot et al. [1] or Owen [22]. We thus suggest that genes exhibiting differential expression conflicts among studies be identified post hoc, and removed from the list of differentially expressed genes; this step to remove genes with conflicting differential expression from the final list of differentially expressed genes may be performed automatically within the associated R package metaRNASeq."


- When the inter-study variability increases, the gains in performance in terms of AUC, sensitivity, and proportion of true positives among uniquely identified genes for the meta-analysis techniques are significant as compared to the global analysis, particularly for the analysis of data from more than two studies. 
 - focus in this work is on differential analyses between two experimental conditions, but can readily be extended to multi-group comparisons. The methods presented are intended for the analysis of data in which all experimental conditions under consideration are included in every study, thus avoiding problems due to the confounding of condition and study effects. 

- “As with all meta-analyses, the p-value combination techniques presented here must overcome differences in experimental objectives, design, and populations of interest, as well as differences in sequencing technology, library preparation, and laboratory-specific effects”. 

- The differential meta-analyses presented here concern expression studies based on RNA-seq data. However, other genomic data are generated by high-throughput sequencing techniques, including chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (CHIP-seq) and DNA methylation sequencing (methyl-seq), and the proposed techniques could potentially be extended to these other kinds of data. However, in order to be biologically relevant, the p-value combination methods rely on the fact that the same test statistics, or in the case of RNA-seq data conditioned tests, are used to obtain p-values for each study. 

- An important challenge for the future will be to propose methods able to jointly analyze related heterogeneous data, such as microarray and RNA-seq data, or other kinds of genomic data. This is not straightforward in a meta-analysis frame- work and remains an open research question. 