# Multi-omics Data Integration, Interpretation, and Its Application. Bioinform Biol Insights
Subramanian I, Verma S, Kumar S, Jere A, Anamika K. Multi-omics Data Integration, Interpretation, and Its Application. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2020 Jan 31;14:1177932219899051. doi: 10.1177/1177932219899051. PMID: 32076369; PMCID: PMC7003173.

- review in which authors focus on the tools and methods that perform integration of multiple omics data and discuss in detail about their applications in understanding the complex human biology.

## The Cancer Genome Atlas
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA; https://cancergenome.nih.gov/) houses one of the largest collections of multi-omics data sets for more than 33 different types of cancer for 20 000 individual tumor samples.13 This initiative aims to generate, merge, analyze, and interpret the profiles of DNA, RNA, protein, and epigenetic changes in tumor samples along with the clinical and histological data. It contains rich molecular and genetic profiles from primary tumor samples of various cancers and their subtypes. They generate high-throughput RNA-Seq, DNA-Seq, miRNA-Seq, single-nucleotide variant (SNV), copy number variation (CNV), DNA methylation, and reverse phase protein array (RPPA) data. Pan-cancer atlas is widely used by the research communities that have helped in making new discoveries about progression, manifestation, and treatment of cancers.13,14 The biospecimens from TCGA are analyzed by mass spectrometry technique, and the cancer cohort proteomics data are available at Clinical Proteomic Tumor Analysis Consortium (CPTAC) (https://cptac-data-portal.georgetown.edu/cptacPublic/).15
## International Cancer Genomics Consortium
International Cancer Genomics Consortium (ICGC; https://icgc.org/) coordinates large-scale generation of genome studies from 76 cancer projects in 21 primary cancer sites from 20 383 donors (as on December 2017). This project mainly contains mutation-related genomic alteration data (both germline and somatic) across cancer types from various ethnicity. The consortium defines the catalog for each tumor type and ensures quality of the data generated and manages data sharing across research communities. The ICGC Data Coordination Center (DCC) operates the ICGC data portal which contains both Open and Restricted access parts of the data.16 The ICGC portal has been used in deriving landmark observations in cancer biology.17,18 The Pan-cancer analysis of whole genomes (PCAWG; https://dcc.icgc.org/pcawg) allows the exploration and analysis of more than 2800 whole genomes from ICGC.
## Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia
Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia (CCLE; (https://portals.broadinstitute.org/ccle) hosted by Broad institute is a compilation of gene expression, copy number, and sequencing data from 947 human cell lines and for 36 tumor types. It also houses the pharmacological profiles of 24 anticancer drugs across 479 cancer cell lines. This project has enabled the identification of novel biomarkers and mechanistic effectors of drug response in different cancer cell lines.19
## Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium
Molecular Taxonomy of Breast Cancer International Consortium (METABRIC; http://molonc.bccrc.ca/aparicio-lab/research/metabric/) is a Canada-UK project that contains clinical traits, expression, single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), and CNV data derived from breast tumors. This project aims to classify breast tumors into further subcategories using the underlying multi-omics molecular signatures. This database identified 10 subgroups of breast cancer and new drug targets that were not previously described, and thus will help in designing the optimal course of treatment for breast cancer.20
## TARGET
TARGET (https://ocg.cancer.gov/programs/target), an initiative similar to TCGA, is driven by the National Cancer Institute (https://www.cancer.gov/) to determine the molecular events that drive childhood cancers.21 These data house the clinical information, gene expression, miRNA expression, copy number, and sequencing data of 24 molecular types of cancer. This database aims to provide a strong basis for functional assessment of genomic alterations across pediatric cancers.21,22
## Omics Discovery Index
Omics Discovery Index (OmicsDI; https://www.omicsdi.org/) contains data sets from 11 repositories in a common data structure. It is an open-source platform to access, discover, and integrate genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics data sets. It contains data sets from humans, model organisms, and nonmodel organisms. Apart from indexing the data sets, OmicsDI also includes normalization and annotation step for every data set that can be integrated.23
Apart from these dedicated databases for multi-omics, National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) archives a wide collection of sequencing data, such as genomics and transcriptomics, from multiple platforms and arrays.

- Integrative tools and methods addressing multi-omics applications, their usage and availability along with details of the input data used by each tool in their case study. —> seems to be a lot of ML